# Release 25.11

We are excited to announce the first stable release of Clan! :tada:

Going forward, we will release branches of Clan based on each stable NixOS
release. The release branches will continue to receive backports for essential
bug fixes and security updates, and great care will be taken to avoid
introducing breaking changes.

To access more recent changes in Clan or `nixpkgs`, the `unstable` branch will
still be available.

Since Clan is tightly coupled to NixOS, users are expected to use the
corresponding stable `nixpkgs` input branch. Breaking changes may only happen
when updating to a newer stable release in the future and will be documented in
the release notes, with a clear migration path.

## Highlights

### Vars

The [vars system](https://docs.clan.lol/reference/cli/vars/) is Clan's
declarative solution for managing generated files, secrets, and dynamic
configuration in your NixOS deployments. It allows automatically generating and
securely storing secrets from within your Nix configuration and using them where
needed.

### Inventory and Clan Services

The [inventory](https://docs.clan.lol/guides/inventory/inventory/) is an
abstract service layer for configuring distributed services across machine
boundaries. Among other things it allows using Clan Services. These expand the
concept of NixOS modules over your whole infrastructure instead of acting on a
single machine. They introduce the concept of *roles*, which can be assigned to
machines, e.g. a backup Clan Service might have client and target roles.

### CLI

The [Clan CLI](https://docs.clan.lol/reference/cli/) provides a powerful tool to
interact with your Clan. It allows deploying and updating one or more machines in
parallel, managing secrets, installing to new machines, accessing them via SSH
and much more. A full list of subcommands can be explored in [the
docs](https://docs.clan.lol/reference/cli/) or using the provided
auto-completions. Its API and Interfaces are committed and won't change without
proper deprecation notes and life cycles.

## Unstable Features

The following features are already used, but not considered fully stable yet.
They are subject to change and might not provide clear migrations. 

### Networking

Clan provides [automatic
networking](https://docs.clan.lol/guides/networking/networking/) with fallback
mechanisms to reliably connect to your machines. It allows specifying one or
more methods of reaching a machine (VPNs, Tor, direct connection) and provides a
uniform way to address it. The configured connections will then be tried in order
of their configured priority with fallback.

### Clan Exports

[Exports](https://docs.clan.lol/guides/services/exports/) are a mechanism for
Clan Services to share structured data. They provide a way for different
machines and service instances to discover and access information they need from
each other, without the need to evaluate the full configuration of a different
machine. 

### Clan Tests

While originally intended only for internal use, we have noticed people starting
to use them. Our [testing
framework](https://docs.clan.lol/guides/contributing/testing/) allows testing
services as VM or container based tests. They support secret generation and
networking, allowing for full integration tests of infrastructure.


## Services

These are the services currently provided in clan-core. Clan's architecture
provides the ability to write your [own
services](https://docs.clan.lol/guides/services/community/). We also have
started a list of [community](https://docs.clan.lol/services/community/)
services. 

| Service            | Stable | Experimental | Deprecated |
|--------------------|--------|--------------|------------|
| borgbackup         | ✓      |              |            |
| data-mesher        | ✓      |              |            |
| dyndns             | ✓      |              |            |
| emergency-access   | ✓      |              |            |
| garage             | ✓      |              |            |
| importer           | ✓      |              |            |
| kde                | ✓      |              |            |
| localbackup        | ✓      |              |            |
| matrix-synapse     | ✓      |              |            |
| mycelium           | ✓      |              |            |
| packages           | ✓      |              |            |
| sshd               | ✓      |              |            |
| static-hosts       | ✓      |              |            |
| syncthing          | ✓      |              |            |
| trusted-nix-caches | ✓      |              |            |
| users              | ✓      |              |            |
| wifi               | ✓      |              |            |
| wireguard          | ✓      |              |            |
| zerotier           | ✓      |              |            |
| certificates       |        | ✓            |            |
| coredns            |        | ✓            |            |
| hello-world        |        | ✓            |            |
| internet           |        | ✓            |            |
| monitoring         |        | ✓            |            |
| tor                |        | ✓            |            |
| yggdrasil          |        | ✓            |            |
| admin              |        |              | ✓          |

## Feedback

We welcome your feedback and contributions. Join the conversation on
[Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#clan:clan.lol) or report issues on our [issue
tracker](https://git.clan.lol/clan/clan-core/issues).
